Proposal: Canary deployments for TiDB-Operator (#3236)
pingcap/tidb-operator: docs/design-proposals/2020-09-07-canary-deployments-for-tidb-operator.md

# Canary deployments for TiDB-Operator

## Summary

This document presents a design to support canary deployments TiDB-Operator.

## Motivation

When upgrade TiDB-Operator, users may want to deploy multiple cluster-scoped TiDB-Operators in the same Kubernetes cluster.

> And choose some specific tidb clusters will be managed by new  version TiDB-Operator, the others are still managed by old version. When the new version TiDB-Operator is fully tested, replace the old one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And choose some specific TiDB clusters will be managed by the new version TiDB-Operator, the others are still managed by the old version. When the new version TiDB-Operator is fully tested, replace the old one.
```

### Goals

* Deploy multiple TiDB-Operator in one Kubernetes cluster
* Manage tidbcluster which be selected
* Don't manage `tidbcluster` which be excluded

### Non-Goals

* Upgrading `TiDB-Operator`
* Upgrading `tidbcluster`

> ## Proposal

Reviewer 2: Could you please add more detail?
I think there are two issues here:

- TiDB Operator supports managing TidbClusters by label selector, which we can add configuration in the values.yaml of the TiDB Operator chart and pass it as an option [here](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb-operator/blob/master/cmd/controller-manager/main.go#L162)
- Support to deploy multiple cluster-scoped TiDB Operators in the same Kubernetes cluster. Can this be done easily with Helm?

Add `labelSelector` and `excludedLabelSelector`
When sync `tidbcluster` CRDs filter by `labelSelector` and  excluded by `excludedLabelSelector`.

### Example

> 1. Update the old version `TiDB-Operator` `spec.excludedLabelSelector` excluded `tidbcluster` which be labeled `tidb-operator/managed=v1.1.4`

Reviewer 2: Is it OK we just use `labelSelector`? For example, with TiDB Operator v1.1.3, all of the clusters will be labeled as `tidb-operator/managed=v1.1.3`, and then deploy TiDB Operator v1.1.4, configure its `labelSelector` as `tidb-operator/managed=v1.1.4`.

Author: Yeah, I think just use `labelSelector` is OK.

- When listening to Pod events, get `tidbcluster` by ownerReferences, and then judge whether to join the queue by the `tidbcluster` label.
6. tidb-shceduler: 
- When the scheduler monitors the event of the Pod, it obtains the information in statefulset according to ownerReferences and determines whether it should schedule it by itself
7. webhook: 
- Different webhooks are configured with different APIService addresses, and other configurations are the same. 
- When the event of the Pod is monitored, the information in `tidbcluster` is obtained according to ownerReferences, and the judgment to  process or not.
8. apiserver:
- Currently aggregated apiserver is not enabled.
9. Helm: 
- The tidb-controller-manager and tidb-scheduler deployment name need a version suffix.
- The RBAC and other public resources deployed by helm does also need a version suffix, avoiding deleting public resources when helm delete `tidb-operator` release.
- User must set different .Values.clusterName or helm release name between two version of `tidb-operator` releases.

## Example
1. Label all current `tidbcluster` with `tidb-operator/managed=v1.1.3`

> 2. Update the old version `TiDB-Operator` `spec.labelSelector` filter `tidbcluster` which be labeled `tidb-operator/managed=v1.1.3`

Reviewer 2: When we first upgrade to the Operator with this feature, the old version does not support labelSelector yet, we may have to upgrade to the new version with the `pause` feature first.

> 
> When upgrade TiDB-Operator, users may want to deploy multiple cluster-scoped TiDB-Operators in the same Kubernetes cluster.
> And choose some specific TiDB clusters will be managed by the new version TiDB-Operator, the others are still managed by the old version. When the new version TiDB-Operator is fully tested, replace the old one.
> 
> ### Goals
> 
> * Deploy multiple `tidb-operator` in one Kubernetes cluster
> * Manage `tidbcluster` which be selected
> 
> ### Non-Goals
> 
> * Upgrading `tidb-operator`
> * Upgrading `tidbcluster`
> 
> ## Proposal
> 
> 1. Add a flag to the operator like this `--selector` <label expression> where the label expression is key value pairs of labels and values. 
> 2. Add `spec.labelSelector` in `tidb-operator` helm chart
> 3. Sync `tidbcluster` CRs filter by `labelSelector`
> 
> ### Design Details
> 1. Components that need canary deployments: 
> - All components deployed by helm as long as `created=ture` need to have canary deployments capabilities.
> 2. Label `tidbcluster`:
> - Label the version like `tidb-operator/managed=v1.1.4` on `tidbcluster` CRs.
> 3. Specify labelSelector to `tidb-operator`:
> - Specify `spec.labelSelector` which be labeled `tidb-operator/managed=v1.1.4`
> 4. `tidbcluster`-controller:
> - Tidb-controller will synchronize label to `tidbcluster` and statefulset, but not to Pod to avoid causing upgrade.
> - When a `tidbcluster` event is monitored, judge whether to join the queue by the label.
> 5. advanced-statefulset-controller:
> - When a statefulset event is monitored, then the statefulset's label is used to determine whether to join the queue.
> - When listening to Pod events, get `tidbcluster` by ownerReferences, and then judge whether to join the queue by the `tidbcluster` label.
> 6. tidb-shceduler: 
> - When the scheduler monitors the event of the Pod, it obtains the information in statefulset according to ownerReferences and determines whether it should schedule it by itself
> 7. webhook: 
> - Different webhooks are configured with different APIService addresses, and other configurations are the same. 
> - When the event of the Pod is monitored, the information in `tidbcluster` is obtained according to ownerReferences, and the judgment to  process or not.
> 8. apiserver:
> - Currently aggregated apiserver is not enabled.
> 9. Helm: 
> - The tidb-controller-manager and tidb-scheduler deployment name need a version suffix.
> - The RBAC and other public resources deployed by helm does also need a version suffix, avoiding deleting public resources when helm delete `tidb-operator` release.
> - User must set different .Values.clusterName or helm release name between two version of `tidb-operator` releases.
> 
> ## Example
> 1. Label all current `tidbcluster` with `tidb-operator/managed=v1.1.3`
> 2. Update the old version `TiDB-Operator` `spec.labelSelector` filter `tidbcluster` which be labeled `tidb-operator/managed=v1.1.3`
> 3. Deploy a new version `TiDB-Operator` and specify `spec.labelSelector` which be labeled `tidb-operator/managed=v1.1.4`
> 4. Deploy `tidbcluster` with label `tidb-operator/managed=v1.1.4`
> 5. Full test new version `TiDB-Operator`
> 6. Label all old `tidbcluster` with `tidb-operator/managed=v1.1.4`
> 7. Offline the old version `TiDB-Operator`
> 
> ## Test Case
> 1. When don't specify `spec.labelSelector` in `tidb-operator`, `tidb-operator` will manage all `tidbclusters`
> 2. When specify `spec.labelSelector` in `tidb-operator`, `tidb-operator` will manage `tidbcluster` that only be labeled to `labelSelector`
> 3. Deploy two `tidb-operator` with different .Values.clusterName or helm release name in one Kubernetes cluster.
> 4. Label `tidbcluster` and `tidb-operator` will synchronize label to statefulset
> 5. Helm delete one of `tidb-operator` release, the others `tidb-operator` will no effect.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Canary Upgrade for TiDB-Operator

Thanks @cvvz @DanielZhangQD

## Summary

This document presents a design to support canary deployments TiDB-Operator.

## Motivation

When upgrading TiDB-Operator, users may want to deploy multiple cluster-scoped TiDB-Operators in the same Kubernetes cluster.
And choose some specific TiDB clusters to be managed by the new version TiDB Operator, the others are still managed by the old version. When the new version TiDB Operator is fully tested, the old version can be removed safely.

### Goals

* Deploy multiple clusterScoped `tidb-operator` in one Kubernetes cluster
* Different `tidb-operator` manage different `TidbCluster` with label selector

### Non-Goals

* Upgrading `tidb-operator`
* Upgrading `TidbCluster`

## Proposal

1. Add a flag to the operator like this `--selector` <label expression> where the label expression is key-value pairs of labels and values, the handling of `--selector` will keep consistent with `kubectl`. 
2. Add `spec.labelSelector` in values.yaml of `tidb-operator` helm chart.
3. TiDB Operator syncs the `TidbCluster` CRs filtered by `spec.labelSelector`.

### Design Details
1. Components that need a canary upgrade: 
- All components that can be deployed by the `tidb-operator` chart.
2. Label `TidbCluster`:
- Add version label to `TidbCluster` CRs, for example, `tidb.pingcap.com/managed-by=v1.1.4`, this label needs to be synced to the StatefulSets created for this CR.
3. Support specifying labelSelector for the `tidb-operator` chart.
4. tidb-controller-manager:
- tidb-controller-manager will synchronize labels of `TidbCluster` CR to StatefulSets, but not to Pod to avoid causing upgrade.
- List-watch the custom resources with the labelSelector
- List-watch all the Kubernetes native resources but filter them with the labelSelector before enqueueing
5. advanced-statefulset-controller:
- List-watch the asts with the labelSelector
- When receiving Pod events, get its ownerReferences, and then filter them with the labelSelector before enqueueing
6. tidb-shceduler: 
- When receiving Pod events, get its ownerReferences, and then filter them with the labelSelector before enqueueing
7. webhook: 
- Different webhooks are configured with different APIService addresses, and other configurations are the same. 
- When receiving Pod events, get its ownerReferences, and then filter them with the labelSelector before enqueueing
8. Helm: 
- The deployment name of tidb-controller-manager and tidb-scheduler needs a version suffix.
- The RBAC and other public resources deployed by helm also need a version suffix to avoid being deleted when run `helm delete` to remove the old version TiDB Operator.

## Example
1. Label all current `TidbCluster` with `tidb.pingcap.com/managed-by=v1.1.3`
2. Update the `spec.labelSelector` for old version TiDB Operator to manage the `TidbCluster` labeled with `tidb.pingcap.com/managed-by=v1.1.3`
3. Deploy a new version TiDB Operator and specify `spec.labelSelector` to `tidb.pingcap.com/managed-by=v1.1.4`
4. Deploy `TidbCluster` with label `tidb.pingcap.com/managed-by=v1.1.4`
5. Full test new version TiDB Operator
6. Label all the old `TidbCluster` with `tidb.pingcap.com/managed-by=v1.1.4`
7. Remove the old version TiDB Operator

## Test Case
1. When don't specify `spec.labelSelector` in `tidb-operator`, `tidb-operator` will manage all `TidbCluster`
2. When specify `spec.labelSelector` in `tidb-operator`, `tidb-operator` will manage `TidbCluster` that only labeled with the value of `labelSelector`
3. Deploy two `tidb-operator` with different helm release names in one Kubernetes cluster, check that tidb-controller-manager, tidb-scheduler, advanced statefulset controller and webhook work as expected.
4. Label `TidbCluster` and `tidb-operator` will synchronize labels to StatefulSets
5. Helm delete one of the `tidb-operator` releases, the other `tidb-operator` will work as expected.
```
